1. Simulate n values of a normal random variable X = N (μ, σ2) (choose μ and σ > 0 as you like), and compute the sample mean  ̄x, sample median m, sample standard deviation s. Plot these quantities as functions of n on three separate plots (see a general remark in the end). Check that  ̄x and m converge to μ, as n → ∞, and s converges to σ. Which one converges to μ faster, the sample mean or the sample median? To be sure, estimate the variance of both  ̄x and m for a particular value of n, such as n = 100 (by generating, say, 10000 different random samples of size n and computing the sample variance of the resulting estimates  ̄x and m. The estimate with
the smaller variance is better).

6. Simulate n values of a normal random variable X = N (μ, σ2) (choose μ and σ > 0 as you like), and compute the sample mean  ̄x and sample standard deviation s. The theory claims that these estimates are independent. Check this claim experimentally. Repeat this experiment M times and compute the sample correlation coefficient between  ̄x and σ. Plot this correlation coefficient as functions of M (see a general remark in the end). Check that it converges to zero, as M → ∞ (going up to M = 10000 would be enough). The value of n should be small, such as n = 10 or n = 20.

7. Simulate a sample of n = 100 random numbers in which 80 are drawn from a normal distribution N (5, 1) and the other 20 are drawn from a uniform distribution U (−100, 100) (the latter represent “contamination”, or “background noise”). For this sample calculate (a) the sample mean, (b) the trimmed sample means discarding 10%, 20%, and 30% of the data, (c) the sample median. Which estimate appears to be the most accurate? Repeat this experiment 10000 times and compute the standard deviation for each of these five estimates. The estimate with the smallest variance is best.

8. Simulate a sample of n = 100 random numbers in which 50 are drawn from a normal distribution N (5, 1) and the other 50 are drawn from a uniform distribution U (−100, 100) (the latter represent a “contamination”, or a “background noise”). For this sample calculate (a) the sample mean, (b) the trimmed sample means discarding 10%, 30%, and 60% of the data, (c) the sample median. Which estimate appears to be the most accurate? Repeat this experiment 10000 times and compute the standard deviation for each of these five estimates. The estimate with the smallest variance is best.

16. Simulate n values of a Poisson random variable X = poisson(λ) (choose λ > 0 as you like), and compute the sample mean  ̄x, sample median m, sample standard deviation s. Plot these quantities as functions of n on three separate plots (see a general remark in the end). Do these statistics converge to any limit values, as n → ∞? What are those limits? Do your conclusions agree with the theory? Estimate the variance of  ̄x and m for a particular value of n, such as n = 100 (by generating 10000 random samples of size n and computing the sample variance of the resulting estimates  ̄x and m). Which of these two estimates is better?

General remark: In many projects, you are supposed to generate a sample of n values of a certain random variable, compute some statistics and then plot their values as functions of n. Do this for certain values of n such as n = 100, 200, 300,. . .,10000. This gives you 100 different values of each statistic, well enough for a plot. Important: when increasing n from 100 to 200, then from 200 to 300, etc., do not generate a new sample for every new value of n. Instead, add 100 new values to the old sample (that would make your plots much smoother and nicer).

